Bethesda Game Studios is an American video game developer, acting as in-house development team for parent company Bethesda Softworks, established in 2001. Previously synonymous with parent publisher Bethesda Softworks, the studio's name and logo were established with the release of The Elder Scrolls III: Morrowind in 2002. The studio is currently led by executive producer Todd Howard. A second studio, Bethesda Game Studios Montreal, was opened in Montreal, Quebec, Canada.


== History ==
Bethesda Game Studios was established in 2001. All of the developers from Bethesda Softworks moved to Bethesda Game Studios in 2002. Then Bethesda Softworks and Bethesda Game Studios became separated between publisher and developer. In the past, not all BGS titles were published by the Softworks division. However, beginning with The Elder Scrolls IV: Oblivion for the PlayStation 3, Bethesda Softworks began publishing all Bethesda Game Studios games.
At a time in the mid-2000s, Bethesda Game Studios had two teams—one that made the role-playing video games, and another that was focusing on the International Hot Rod Association drag racing titles.
On December 9, 2015, a new studio located in Montreal was established by Bethesda. The new studio is led by Yves Lachance, the former head of Behaviour Interactive, and is set to broaden Bethesda's portfolio of games across all gaming platforms.


== Games developed ==
Since its formation, Bethesda Game Studios has principally been involved in the development of computer role-playing games in the Fallout and The Elder Scrolls series for consoles and personal computers, all which have been generally commercial and financial successes. As of February 2017, the company was developing two new major games, with The Elder Scrolls VI to follow at a later time.
In 2015, the studio entered into the mobile gaming market with Fallout Shelter based on the same franchise, which gained 50 million players by mid-2016. In February 2017, studio director Todd Howard said that they are in development of another mobile title following on the success of Fallout Shelter.


== Awards ==
2011 — Spike Video Game Awards, Studio of the Year.
2015 — Developer of the Year, The Game Awards (nominated)
2016 — Academy of Interactive Arts & Sciences Hall of Fame - Todd Howard


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website