Fallout 4: Far Harbor is an expansion pack for the 2015 video game Fallout 4, developed by Bethesda Game Studios and published by Bethesda Softworks. Far Harbor was released on May 19, 2016 for Microsoft Windows, PlayStation 4, and Xbox One as downloadable content (DLC). The game is set in the year 2287, in the aftermath of a nuclear fallout that destroys most of the United States. In the expansion, the player character is recruited by a detective agency to investigate the disappearance of a young girl living in a remote area.
Far Harbor can be played in either first-person or third-person perspective. The player controls the protagonist throughout their investigation on the Island, a landmass off the coast of Maine. Far Harbor's main gameplay consists of both quests and puzzle sections. Upon completion of the quests in the game, the player is rewarded with both the franchise's main fictional currency, bottle caps from Nuka-Cola bottles, and experience points. There are a variety of puzzles, some utilize lasers and others allow building using blocks.
Far Harbor was announced three months after the release of Fallout 4 and was influenced by player feedback on the base game's dialogue system, and how it was believed that it was not as successful as the other mechanics. The development team also noticed players' interest in expansions that added large amounts of explorable territory. Due to the size of Far Harbor, the price of Fallout 4's season pass was increased. The PlayStation 4 version was re-released in June 2016 to fix performance issues. The expansion received generally favorable reviews from critics. The addition of new quests was highly praised by critics, but some had mixed opinions on the atmosphere and expansion's use of fog. The main criticisms were directed at the puzzles, which reviewers thought were a waste of time, unnecessary, or overly frustrating. In July 2016, Guillaume Veer accused Bethesda of copying his Fallout: New Vegas mods, named Autumn Leaves. This sparked controversy, though Veer said that he was not upset with the similarities in the games.


== Gameplay ==

Fallout 4: Far Harbor is an expansion pack for the action role-playing single-player video game Fallout 4. Fallout 4 is the fifth installment in the Fallout series and is set 210 years after "The Great War", which resulted in the nuclear devastation across the United States. The expansion is similar to the base game in the sense that the player character (the "Sole Survivor") is tasked with investigating a character's disappearance. In the base game, the player is searching for their lost family, while in Far Harbor, the character is recruited by the Valentine Detective Agency to investigate the disappearance of a young girl named Kasumi. Both the base game and the expansion pack offer the ability to swap between first-person and third-person perspectives. The expansion is set on a radioactive, smog-smothered island, and is located in Fallout's version of Bar Harbor, a town in Hancock County, Maine. Far Harbor features three factions which consist of both violent and peaceful non-player characters, namely the Harbormen of Far Harbor, the synth colony of Acadia, and the Church of the Children of Atom.

The expansion contains quests and puzzles that the player must solve. The way the player completes the quests depends on how much investigating they do. A quick completion by killing the other characters is not always the best option as the player will find options to resolve things peacefully by completing more quests given by the factions. Peaceful resolutions can be made with characters and factions, though these can have ill effects, such as releasing secrets or worsening relations with other factions. In some of the puzzle sections, the player directs lasers to hit designated targets, and in others, the player builds using blocks, reminiscent of Minecraft. Puzzle sections were not featured in the base game. Upon completion of quests, the assisted factions reward the protagonist with bottle caps, one of the fictional currencies found throughout the Fallout series. The player's character also gains experience points. Some of the quests include investigating minor mysteries, retrieving missing items, solving disagreements, and clearing out monster-infested areas.
One of the gameplay mechanics which carried over from the previous iterations is V.A.T.S. (Vault-Tec Assisted Targeting System). While using V.A.T.S., the real-time combat is slowed, allowing the player to choose where to shoot the enemy. This can be used strategically: shooting enemies in the head will typically result in death while shooting the legs can slow them. Weapons can also be shot at, disarming the enemy. Using V.A.T.S. lowers the stamina (Action Points, or AP) of the player. To use more stamina-hungry actions, the player must let it regenerate. The use of Power Armor will result in the player's Action Points being diminished faster if used in combat. The Pip-Boy, a small computer strapped to the character's wrist, also plays a role in both Fallout 4 and Far Harbor. It contains a menu which the player can access to view maps, statistics, data, and items. When the player is able to visit Far Harbor, the Pip-boy will receive a signal from Valentine's Detective Agency.


== Sypnosis ==


=== Setting and characters ===

The expansion is set on a post-apocalyptic version of Mount Desert Island, known in-game as The Island, which is north-east of the Commonwealth, Fallout's post-apocalyptic version of Boston, Massachusetts. The starting point is the eponymous town of Far Harbor, Fallout's version of Bar Harbor, located in Hancock County, Maine. The Island, where many unique creatures reside, is blanketed by radioactive fog. Because the creatures that live inside the fog are unwilling to go anywhere without it, the town uses devices called fog condensers to turn the fog into liquid in order to protect its inhabitants.
There are three major conflicting factions present in the expansion, all residing in separate areas: the Harbormen of Far Harbor; the synth (synthetic humans) colony of Acadia; and the Church of the Children of Atom. The Harbormen of Far Harbor are led by the town leader, Captain Avery, and seek to reclaim The Island from the fog that has gradually driven them out of their homes. The Children of Atom reside in an old nuclear submarine base called the Nucleus and are led by High Confessor Tektus. Tektus is a fanatical follower of the Church of Atom who seeks to disable or destroy the fog condensers. The refuge for the synth colony of Acadia is an abandoned research center at the top of The Island; the group are led by a mysterious prototype synth called DiMA. DiMA is friendly to both the Harbormen and the Children so long as Acadia remains autonomous and isolated from the rest of the world.


=== Plot ===
Valentine's Detective Agency receives a request for help from Kenji and Rei Nakano, a husband and wife living in a remote corner of the Commonwealth. Their daughter, Kasumi, has vanished without a trace or explanation, and the Sole Survivor is sent to investigate. They discover Kasumi had been in contact with Acadia and borrow Kenji's boat to follow her. Arriving in the town of Far Harbor, the Sole Survivor finds The Island to be locked in a tense stalemate between the local residents and the Children of Atom. With the aid of a local hunter and one of the Harbormen named Old Longfellow, the Sole Survivor finds Kasumi living in Acadia. Kasumi has come to believe that she is a synth, and has sought refuge in Acadia though she has started to doubt the intentions of DiMA. At Kasumi's behest, the Sole Survivor switches focus to investigating DiMA, and gradually learns he has consciously chosen to store some of his memories on hard drives outside of his body. He has hidden them inside a computer simulation in the Children of Atom's base, the Nucleus, but has grown increasingly concerned that if the Children access the memories, they will have the means to destroy Far Harbor. The Sole Survivor approaches the Children of Atom to recover DiMA's memories and learns that he put in place a series of fail-safes to protect Acadia, and to preserve the balance of power between Far Harbor and the Children of Atom. These are the access codes to a nuclear warhead, stored within the Nucleus, and the means to sabotage the fog condensers protecting Far Harbor. The Sole Survivor also discovers that DiMA murdered Captain Avery and replaced her with a synth to maintain peace between Far Harbor and Acadia.


==== Endings ====
There are eight possible endings. The Sole Survivor is faced with a choice: to destroy Far Harbor, to destroy the Children of Atom, or to inform the people of Far Harbor of DiMA's crime and trigger a feud between the Harbormen and Acadia. Should the player choose to detonate the warhead, the Harbormen will take control of the island, while if the player destroys the fog condensers, the Children will become dominant. In both scenarios, Acadia will be spared, though DiMA will disapprove of the player's choices. Alternatively, if the player confronts DiMA over Avery's murder, Acadia may become hostile. The Sole Survivor is able to establish a more permanent peace between all parties by assassinating or chasing away High Confessor Tektus, and allowing DiMA to replace him with a synth who will adopt a more moderate stance towards the Harbormen. The Sole Survivor can choose to make the main factions aware of Acadia's existence. If so, The Institute, a scientific organization that made the Synths, will send agents to reclaim the synths, while the Brotherhood of Steel, a quasi-religious organization with roots from the United States Armed Forces, will launch an expedition to exterminate them. The Railroad, a group against the existence of The Institute with the aim of freeing sentient Synths, will send an operative to make contact with Acadia, though Acadia will reject their help.
In the aftermath, the Sole Survivor returns to the Nakano family back in the Commonwealth. Kasumi, depending on the player's choices, may return with the player character or to stay in Acadia.


== Development and release ==

Far Harbor was developed by Bethesda Game Studios and was announced three months after the official release of Fallout 4—alongside Automatron, Wasteland Workshop, and teasers of other upcoming expansions—in a blog post on February 16, 2016. The expansion was released on May 19, for Microsoft Windows, PlayStation 4 and Xbox One. Of the first three expansions, Far Harbor added the largest landmass, and was consequently sold for a higher price. It also added new dungeons (self-contained quest locations), quests, creatures, and other miscellaneous features. The expansion was included in the Fallout 4 season pass, a collection of all the expansion packs. Due to the large amount of additional content, the price for the pass was increased from US$30 to $50.
The expansion took influence from the player's feedback regarding the dialogue system in Fallout 4, and how it "didn't work as well as other features". The dialogue options in Far Harbor were designed for players to have more flexibility surrounding the game's ending. The dialogue system present in Fallout games allow the players to converse with and influence the non-player characters. The development team also found players were interested in visiting new locations, also inspiring Far Harbor. As a result, the expansion required more development costs, time, and resources.
Two weeks after the expansion's official release, the PlayStation 4 version was re-released to fix performance issues. In a performance analysis by Eurogamer's Digital Foundry, it was discovered that although Fallout 4 typically ran at 30 frames per second (FPS), when the player was outside and in Far Harbor's foggy biomes, the frame rate could drop to 15 FPS, and could drop even lower during action-oriented events such as firefights. In the same analysis, the Xbox One version was found to run at 20–30 FPS but experienced different issues, such as stuttering and software lock-ups. After the update was released, the game was more stable. This result was achieved by toning down the level of fog.


== Reception ==
Fallout 4: Far Harbor was released to "generally favorable" reviews, according to the review aggregator Metacritic. Reviewers, such as Nic Rowen (Destructoid) and Christopher Livingston (PC Gamer), highly praised the addition of new quests but many, including Jack de Quidt (Rock, Paper, Shotgun), Chad Sapieha (Post Arcade), and the reviewers for GameCentral, disliked the newly introduced puzzle sections. Reviewers, including Dan Stapleton (IGN), Chad Sapieha, Trace Cowen (Complex) and Charles Battersby (Geek), mentioned comparisons to the video game Minecraft when talking about the the block-related content added in the expansion. In particular, Dan Stapleton expressed admiration of the new quests but said that the puzzle rooms were "so hard to fail I'm not sure why Bethesda bothered with it".
The new quests garnered praise from reviewers, though the puzzle sections were criticised. Dan Stapleton said the Far Harbor expansion contained some of the strongest quest content in Fallout 4, and Peter Brown (GameSpot) commended the addition of "hours of side quests driven by curious characters". Matt Wittaker (Hardcore Gamer) appreciated the quests, praising the main questline for its focus on "moral ambiguity and tough choices", stating that was what Fallout fans were seeking. Jack de Quidt (Rock, Paper, Shotgun) abhorred the puzzles, regarding them as very frustrating despite considering it "a small part of the release", and considered the engine insufficient for the intricate puzzle sequences. The reviewers for Game Revolution and Metro expressed similar distaste for the puzzles, with Game Revolution stating that it negatively tested the limits of the control scheme, and while Metro disliked the puzzle sections, they believed that the DLC added "dozens of hours" through the means of side-quests and other activities.
Reviewers had varying opinions on the atmosphere and the fog. Dan Stapleton commended the majority of the content except the fog, which he believed to become annoying after time, but Matt Wittaker thought the fog was not much of a nuisance if the player's character was built to mitigate radiation. Christopher Livingston (PC Gamer) said that "you can literally taste [the atmosphere]", and David Ambrosini (IGN) complemented it. Reviewers were also divided over the storyline with the writers for Game Revolution admiring the story and new characters, while Peter Brown found it uninteresting.
Some reviewers had problems with the expansion's repetitiveness, and Nic Rowen (Destructoid) was disappointed with the lack of uniqueness in the release. Chad Sapieha (National Post) said that he was growing weary of the repetitive small tasks like managing loot, and traveling between settlements just to dispose of it, and added that he was done with Fallout 4 and its DLC and prepared to move onto a further installment. David Soriano (IGN) commended the extensive size of the map but alluded to it being somewhat wasted. Alice Bell (VideoGamer.com) and the reviewers at GameCentral commended the value for money, with Bell saying that Far Harbor was the best of the first three expansion packs for getting "the most bang for your buck", even taking into account the design flaws.


=== Similarities with Autumn Leaves ===
In July 2016, Mod DB user Guillaume Veer, who goes by the online alias of BaronVonChateau, accused Bethesda of copying one of his Fallout: New Vegas mods, named Autumn Leaves. When comparing the plot of Autumn Leaves and one of Far Harbor's quests called Brain Dead, Veer described both of the games as having “a colorful cast of excentric [sic] robots, in charge of a forgotten Vault where a strange murder happened". Pete Hines, the vice president of Bethesda's marketing team, responded with: "we love our mod community and would never disrespect them." He continued on to say that any similarities were completely coincidental.
Other similarities were discussed in an article by Mat Paget (GameSpot), some of them being that both Far Habor and Autumn Leaves include a "mysterious death of the prime financier of the Vault" and that both games have a feature where using the character's voice can determine whether they are a robot. Veer noted that he was not upset with the similarities, saying that he takes inspiration from other games too; "I seriously think this is perfectly okay. After all, Autumn Leaves' inspirations are countless ... and being influenced is a natural part of the writing process." Veer said that having the names of modders in the game's credits for acknowledgement would be beneficial. He also said that he would have been comfortable even if Bethesda had deliberately used content from Autumn Leaves. In Veer's same blog post, he wrote that "truth be said, I honestly thought Bethesda's staff played Autumn Leaves, had a blast with it (I hope) took some things out of it and made their own thing for Far Harbor. And I seriously think this is perfectly okay".


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website