The Game Awards is an annual awards ceremony honoring achievements in the video game industry. The ceremonies also feature the premieres of new titles and an in-depth look at previously announced games. The shows are solely produced and hosted by Geoff Keighley, who had worked on its predecessor, the Spike Video Game Awards, for over ten years.


== History ==
From 2003 to 2013, Spike TV promoted and televised the Spike Video Game Awards (abbreviated VGA) near the end of each calendar year to honor video games releases during that year. Geoff Keighley served as the producer and often host for these shows. In 2013, Spike opted to rename the awards from VGA to VGX as to reflect that they wanted to focus more on next-generation games that were being ushered in by the onset of the eighth generation of consoles, as well as bringing comedian Joel McHale to co-host alongside Keighley. The 2013 show was considered to be disappointing and aimed as a more commercial work rather than a celebration of video game achievements.
Keighley opted to drop out from further involvement in the VGX, allowing Spike to retain ownership of the property; in November 2014, Spike TV announced that they had opted to drop the awards show in its entirety. Instead, Keighley worked with several entities within the industry, including console hardware manufacturers Sony, Microsoft, and Nintendo, and several large publishers, to financially back and craft a new awards show, the Game Awards, with Spike's blessing. Keighley was able to secure space for hosting the live event. Without a broadcaster, Keighley and the entities agreed to stream the live show on the consoles' networks and on Valve Corporation's Steam service, as to be able to reach a much larger audience than Spike TV previously had.


== Process ==
The Game Awards has an advisory committee which includes representatives from hardware manufactures Microsoft, Sony, Nintendo, and AMD, and software publishers Electronic Arts, Activision, Rockstar Games, Telltale Games, Ubisoft, Valve, and Warner Bros. Interactive Entertainment. This committee selects around thirty influential video game news organizations that will be able to nominate and subsequently vote on the video games in several categories. The advisory committee otherwise does not participate in the nomination or voting process. During the nomination round, each of the news outlets provides a list of games in several categories; games for the eSports-related categories are chosen by a specific subset of these outlets. The committee complies the nominations and selects the most-nominated titles for voting by these same outlets.


== Ceremonies and winners ==


=== 2014 ===

The 2014 ceremony took place at The AXIS on December 5, 2014.
Game of the Year - Dragon Age: Inquisition
Developer of the Year - Nintendo
Best Independent Game - Shovel Knight
Best Mobile/Handheld Game - Hearthstone: Heroes of Warcraft
Best Narrative - Valiant Hearts: The Great War
Best Score/Soundtrack - Destiny
Best Performance - Trey Parker (as Various Voices, South Park: The Stick of Truth)
Games for Change - Valiant Hearts: The Great War
Best Shooter - Far Cry 4
Best Action/Adventure - Middle-Earth: Shadow of Mordor
Best Role-Playing Game - Dragon Age: Inquisition
Best Fighting Game - Super Smash Bros. for Wii U
Best Family Game - Mario Kart 8
Best Sports/Racing Game - Mario Kart 8
Best Online Direction - Destiny
Best Remaster - Grand Theft Auto V
Most Anticipated Game - The Witcher 3: Wild Hunt
ESports Player of the Year - Matt “NaDeSHoT” Haag
ESports Team of the Year - Ninjas in Pyjamas
Trending Gamer - TotalBiscuit
Best Fan Creation - Twitch Plays Pokémon
Industry Icon Award - Ken Williams and Roberta Williams (Sierra Entertainment)


=== 2015 ===

The 2015 ceremony took place at the Microsoft Theater on December 3, 2015.
Game of the Year - The Witcher 3: Wild Hunt
Developer of the Year - CD Projekt RED
Best Independent Game - Rocket League
Best Mobile/Handheld Game - Lara Croft Go
Best Narrative - Her Story
Best Art Direction - Ori and the Blind Forest
Best Score/Soundtrack - Metal Gear Solid V: The Phantom Pain
Best Performance - Viva Seifert (as Hannah Smith, Her Story)
Games for Impact - Life is Strange
Best Shooter - Splatoon
Best Action/Adventure - Metal Gear Solid V: The Phantom Pain
Best Role-Playing Game - The Witcher 3: Wild Hunt
Best Fighting Game - Mortal Kombat X
Best Family Game - Super Mario Maker
Best Sports/Racing Game - Rocket League
Best Multiplayer - Splatoon
Most Anticipated Game - No Man's Sky
ESports Player of the Year - Kenny "KennyS" Schrub (Team EnVyUs)
ESports Team of the Year - OpTic Gaming
ESports Game of the Year - Counter Strike: Global Offensive
Trending Gamer - Greg Miller
Best Fan Creation - Portal Stories: Mel
Industry Icon Award - Brett Sperry and Louis Castle (Westwood Studios)


=== 2016 ===

The 2016 ceremony took place at the Microsoft Theater on December 1, 2016.
Game of the Year - Overwatch
Best Game Direction - Blizzard Entertainment
Best Independent Game - Inside
Best Mobile/Handheld Game - Pokémon Go
Best VR Game - Rez Infinite
Best Narrative - Uncharted 4: A Thief's End
Best Art Direction - Inside
Best Music/Sound Design - Doom
Best Performance - Nolan North (as Nathan Drake, Uncharted 4: A Thief's End)
Games for Impact - That Dragon, Cancer
Best Action Game - Doom
Best Action/Adventure Game - Dishonored 2
Best Role-Playing Game - The Witcher 3: Wild Hunt – Blood and Wine
Best Fighting Game - Street Fighter V
Best Strategy Game - Civilization VI
Best Family Game - Pokémon Go
Best Sports/Racing Game - Forza Horizon 3
Best Multiplayer - Overwatch
Most Anticipated Game - The Legend of Zelda: Breath of the Wild
ESports Player of the Year - Marcelo "Coldzera" David (SK Gaming)
ESports Team of the Year - Cloud9
ESports Game of the Year - Overwatch
Trending Gamer - boogie2988
Best Fan Creation - Enderal: The Shards of Order
Industry Icon Award - Hideo Kojima


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website