Quantum information science is an area of study based on the idea that information science depends on quantum effects in physics. It includes theoretical issues in computational models as well as more experimental topics in quantum physics including what can and cannot be done with quantum information. The term quantum information theory is sometimes used, but it fails to encompass experimental research in the area.
Subfields include:
Quantum computing, which deals on the one hand with the question how and whether one can build a quantum computer and on the other hand, algorithms that harness its power (see quantum algorithm)
Quantum complexity theory
Quantum cryptography and its generalization, quantum communication
Quantum error correction
Quantum communication complexity
Quantum entanglement, as seen from an information-theoretic point of view
Quantum dense coding
Quantum teleportation is a well-known quantum information processing operation, which can be used to move any arbitrary quantum state from one particle (at one location) to another.


== See also ==
No-communication theorem
Quantum decision tree complexity
Quantum capacity
Quantum communication channel
Entanglement-assisted classical capacity


== References ==
Nielsen, M.A. and Chuang, I.L. Quantum computation and quantum information. Cambridge University Press, 2000. ISBN 0-521-63235-8


== External links ==
Quantiki – quantum information science portal and wiki.
ERA-Pilot QIST WP1 European roadmap on Quantum Information Processing and Communication
QIIC – Quantum Information, Imperial College London.
QIP – Quantum Information Group, University of Leeds. The quantum information group at the University of Leeds is engaged in researching a wide spectrum of aspects of quantum information. This ranges from algorithms, quantum computation, to physical implementations of information processing and fundamental issues in quantum mechanics. Also contains some basic tutorials for the lay audience.
mathQI Research Group on Mathematics and Quantum Information.
CQIST Center for Quantum Information Science & Technology at the University of Southern California
CQuIC Center for Quantum Information and Control, including theoretical and experimental groups from University of New Mexico, University of Arizona.
CQT Centre for Quantum Technologies at the National University of Singapore